_episodes/00-why-hpc.md, before:

---
title: "Why Use a Cluster?"
teaching: 15
exercises: 5
questions:
- "Why would I be interested in High Performance Computing (HPC)?"
- "What can I expect to learn from this course?"
objectives:
- "Be able to describe what an HPC system is"
- "Identify how an HPC system could benefit you."  
keypoints:
- "High Performance Computing (HPC) typically involves connecting to very large computing systems elsewhere in the world."
- "These other systems can be used to do work that would either be impossible or much slower or smaller systems."
- "The standard method of interacting with such systems is via a command line interface called Bash."
---

## Why Use These Computers?

> ## What do you need?  
>
> Talk to your neighbor about your research.  How does computing
> help you do your research?  How could more computing help you
> do more or better research?  
{: .challenge}

Frequently, research problems that use computing can outgrow the desktop
or laptop computer where they started:

* A statistics student wants to do cross-validate their model.  This involves
running the model 1000 times -- but each run takes an hour.  Running on their
laptop will take over a month!

* A genomics researcher has been using small datasets of sequence data, but
soon will be receiving a new type of sequencing data that is 10 times as large.
It's already challenging to open the datasets on their computer -- analyzing
these larger datasets will probably crash it.

* An engineer is using a fluid dynamics package that has an option to run
in parallel.  So far, they haven't used this option on their desktop, but in
going from 2D to 3D simulations, simulation time has more than tripled and it
might be useful to take advantage of that feature.  

In all these cases, what is needed is access to more computers than can be
used at the same time.  Luckily, large scale computing systems -- shared computing
resources with lots of computers -- are available at many universities, labs,
or through national networks.  These resources usually have
more central processing units(CPUs), CPUs that operate at higher speeds,
more memory, more storage, and
faster connections with other computer systems.  They are frequently called
"clusters", "supercomputers" or resources for "high performance computing" or
HPC.  In this lesson, we will usually use the terminology of HPC and HPC cluster.  

Using a cluster often has the following advantages for researchers:

* **Speed.** With many more CPU cores, often with higher performance specs,
  than a typical laptop or desktop, HPC systems can offer
  significant speed up.
* **Volume.** Many HPC systems have both the processing memory (RAM) and disk
  storage to handle very large amounts of data. Terabytes of RAM and
  petabytes of storage are available for research projects.
* **Efficiency.** Many HPC systems operate a pool of resources that are drawn
  on by a many users.  In most cases when the pool is large and diverse enough
  the resources on the system are used almost constantly.
* **Cost.** Bulk purchasing and government funding mean that the cost to the
  research community for using these systems in significantly less that it
  would be otherwise.
* **Convenience.** Maybe your calculations just take a long time to run or are
  otherwise inconvenient to run on your personal computer. There's no need to
  tie up your own computer for hours when you can use someone else's instead.

This is how a large-scale compute system like a cluster can help solve problems like
those listed at the start of the lesson.  

> ## Thinking ahead
>
> How do you think using a large-scale computing system will be different
> from using your laptop? Talk to your neighbor about some
> differences you may already know about, and some
> differences/difficulties you imagine you may run into.
{: .challenge}

## On Command Line

Using HPC systems often involves the use of a shell through a command line
interface (CLI) and either specialized software or programming techniques.  The
shell is a program with the special role of having the job of running other
programs rather than doing calculations or similar tasks itself.  What the user
types goes into the shell, which then figures out what commands to run and
orders the computer to execute them.  (Note that the shell is called "the
shell" because it encloses the operating system in order to hide some of its
complexity and make it simpler to interact with.)  The most popular Unix shell
is Bash, the Bourne Again SHell (so-called because it's derived from a shell
written by Stephen Bourne).  Bash is the default shell on most modern
implementations of Unix and in most packages that provide Unix-like tools for
Windows.

Interacting with the shell is done via a command line interface (CLI) on most
HPC systems.  In the earliest days of computers, the only way to interact with
early computers was to rewire them.  From the 1950s to the 1980s most people
used line printers.  These devices only allowed input and output of the
letters, numbers, and punctuation found on a standard keyboard, so programming
languages and software interfaces had to be designed around that constraint and
text-based interfaces were the way to do this.  Typing-based interfaces are
often called a **command-line interface**, or CLI, to distinguish it from a
**graphical user interface**, or GUI, which most people now use.  The heart of
a CLI is a **read-evaluate-print loop**, or REPL: when the user types a command
and then presses the Enter (or Return) key, the computer reads it, executes it,
and prints its output.  The user then types another command, and so on until
the user logs off.

Learning to use Bash or any other shell sometimes feels more like programming
than like using a mouse.  Commands are terse (often only a couple of characters
long), their names are frequently cryptic, and their output is lines of text
rather than something visual like a graph.  However, using a command line
interface can be extremely powerful, and learning how to use one will allow
you to reap the benefits described above.  

## The rest of this lesson

The only way to use these types of resources is by learning to use the command line.
This introduction to HPC systems has two parts:

* We will learn to use the UNIX command line (also known as Bash).
* We will use our new Bash skills to connect to and operate a high-performance computing supercomputer.

The skills we learn here have other uses beyond just HPC -
Bash and UNIX skills used everywhere, be it for web development, running software, or operating servers.
It's become so essential that Microsoft
[now ships it as part of Windows](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/store/p/ubuntu/9nblggh4msv6)!
Knowing how to use Bash and HPC systems will allow you to operate virtually any modern device.
Wit all of this in mind, let's connect to a cluster and get started!

Commit message:

removing some command line stuff

_episodes/00-why-hpc.md, after:

---
title: "Why Use a Cluster?"
teaching: 15
exercises: 5
questions:
- "Why would I be interested in High Performance Computing (HPC)?"
- "What can I expect to learn from this course?"
objectives:
- "Be able to describe what an HPC system is"
- "Identify how an HPC system could benefit you."  
keypoints:
- "High Performance Computing (HPC) typically involves connecting to very large computing systems elsewhere in the world."
- "These other systems can be used to do work that would either be impossible or much slower or smaller systems."
- "The standard method of interacting with such systems is via a command line interface called Bash."
---

## Why Use These Computers?

> ## What do you need?  
>
> Talk to your neighbor about your research.  How does computing
> help you do your research?  How could more computing help you
> do more or better research?  
{: .challenge}

Frequently, research problems that use computing can outgrow the desktop
or laptop computer where they started:

* A statistics student wants to do cross-validate their model.  This involves
running the model 1000 times -- but each run takes an hour.  Running on their
laptop will take over a month!

* A genomics researcher has been using small datasets of sequence data, but
soon will be receiving a new type of sequencing data that is 10 times as large.
It's already challenging to open the datasets on their computer -- analyzing
these larger datasets will probably crash it.

* An engineer is using a fluid dynamics package that has an option to run
in parallel.  So far, they haven't used this option on their desktop, but in
going from 2D to 3D simulations, simulation time has more than tripled and it
might be useful to take advantage of that feature.  

In all these cases, what is needed is access to more computers than can be
used at the same time.  Luckily, large scale computing systems -- shared computing
resources with lots of computers -- are available at many universities, labs,
or through national networks.  These resources usually have
more central processing units(CPUs), CPUs that operate at higher speeds,
more memory, more storage, and
faster connections with other computer systems.  They are frequently called
"clusters", "supercomputers" or resources for "high performance computing" or
HPC.  In this lesson, we will usually use the terminology of HPC and HPC cluster.  

Using a cluster often has the following advantages for researchers:

* **Speed.** With many more CPU cores, often with higher performance specs,
  than a typical laptop or desktop, HPC systems can offer
  significant speed up.
* **Volume.** Many HPC systems have both the processing memory (RAM) and disk
  storage to handle very large amounts of data. Terabytes of RAM and
  petabytes of storage are available for research projects.
* **Efficiency.** Many HPC systems operate a pool of resources that are drawn
  on by a many users.  In most cases when the pool is large and diverse enough
  the resources on the system are used almost constantly.
* **Cost.** Bulk purchasing and government funding mean that the cost to the
  research community for using these systems in significantly less that it
  would be otherwise.
* **Convenience.** Maybe your calculations just take a long time to run or are
  otherwise inconvenient to run on your personal computer. There's no need to
  tie up your own computer for hours when you can use someone else's instead.

This is how a large-scale compute system like a cluster can help solve problems like
those listed at the start of the lesson.  

> ## Thinking ahead
>
> How do you think using a large-scale computing system will be different
> from using your laptop? Talk to your neighbor about some
> differences you may already know about, and some
> differences/difficulties you imagine you may run into.
{: .challenge}

## On the Command Line

Using HPC systems often involves the use of a shell through a command line
interface (CLI) and either specialized software or programming techniques.  The
shell is a program with the special role of having the job of running other
programs rather than doing calculations or similar tasks itself.  What the user
types goes into the shell, which then figures out what commands to run and
orders the computer to execute them.  (Note that the shell is called "the
shell" because it encloses the operating system in order to hide some of its
complexity and make it simpler to interact with.)  The most popular Unix shell
is Bash, the Bourne Again SHell (so-called because it's derived from a shell
written by Stephen Bourne).  Bash is the default shell on most modern
implementations of Unix and in most packages that provide Unix-like tools for
Windows.

Interacting with the shell is done via a command line interface (CLI) on most
HPC systems.  In the earliest days of computers, the only way to interact with
early computers was to rewire them.  From the 1950s to the 1980s most people
used line printers.  These devices only allowed input and output of the
letters, numbers, and punctuation found on a standard keyboard, so programming
languages and software interfaces had to be designed around that constraint and
text-based interfaces were the way to do this.  Typing-based interfaces are
often called a **command-line interface**, or CLI, to distinguish it from a
**graphical user interface**, or GUI, which most people now use.  The heart of
a CLI is a **read-evaluate-print loop**, or REPL: when the user types a command
and then presses the Enter (or Return) key, the computer reads it, executes it,
and prints its output.  The user then types another command, and so on until
the user logs off.

Learning to use Bash or any other shell sometimes feels more like programming
than like using a mouse.  Commands are terse (often only a couple of characters
long), their names are frequently cryptic, and their output is lines of text
rather than something visual like a graph.  However, using a command line
interface can be extremely powerful, and learning how to use one will allow
you to reap the benefits described above.  

## The rest of this lesson

Depending on your instructor, you may now cover some
basic command line skills, or jump right into using a
cluster!
